गूढं वसुदेवगिरा कर्तुं ते निष्क्रियस्य संस्कारान् ।
हृद्गतहोरातत्त्वो गर्गमुनिस्त्वत् गृहं विभो गतवान् ॥१॥
गूढम्	secretly (said)
वसुदेव-गिरा	the words of Vasudeva (directed by that)
कर्तुम् ते	to do (perform) Thy
निष्क्रियस्य	who are above all rites and rituals
संस्कारान्	(Thy) sacraments
हृद्-गत-होरा-तत्व:	an expert in astrology
गर्ग-मुनि:	Garga Muni
त्वत्-गृहम्	to Thy house
विभो	O Lord!
गतवान्	went
O All pervading Lord! Thou are above and beyond all ceremonies and rites. Yet, Garga Muni an expert at astronomy and astrology, went to Thy house at the secret request of Vasudeva, to perform sacraments for Thee.
नन्दोऽथ नन्दितात्मा वृन्दिष्टं मानयन्नमुं यमिनाम् ।
मन्दस्मितार्द्रमूचे त्वत्संस्कारान् विधातुमुत्सुकधी: ॥२॥
नन्द:-अथ	Nanda, then
नन्दित-आत्मा	delightfully
वृन्दिष्टम्	the greatest of all
मानयन्-अमुम्	honouring, this (Garga Muni)
यमिनाम्	(greatest) of all the sages
मन्द्-स्मित-आर्द्रम्-ऊचे	with a gentle smile said (requested)
त्वत्-संस्कारन्	sacraments for Thee
विधातुम्-उत्सुक-धी:	to perform (who) was eager
Nanda was very delighted and he honoured the greatest of all the sages Garga Muni, who was eager to perform the sacraments for Thee. He then, with a gentle smile requested the sage to perform the rites.
यदुवंशाचार्यत्वात् सुनिभृतमिदमार्य कार्यमिति कथयन् ।
गर्गो निर्गतपुलकश्चक्रे तव साग्रजस्य नामानि ॥३॥
यदुवंश-	of the Yadu clan
आचार्यत्वात्	being the priest
सुनिभृतम्-इदम्-	very secretly this
आर्य कार्यम्-इति	O Respected One (Nanda), should be done, thus
कथयन् गर्ग:	saying, sage Garga
निर्गत-पुलक:-	with horripilation
चक्रे तव	performed, Thy with Thy elder brother's
साग्रजस्य नामानि	naming (ceremony)
Sage Garga said,'O Respected Nanda, since I am the priest of the Yadu clan, this ceremony must be performed in great secrecy'. Saying so, with horripilation over his body he performed the naming ceremony of Thee and Thy elder brother.
कथमस्य नाम कुर्वे सहस्रनाम्नो ह्यनन्तनाम्नो वा ।
इति नूनं गर्गमुनिश्चक्रे तव नाम नाम रहसि विभो ॥४॥
कथम्-अस्य	how, for this (child)
नाम कुर्वे	naming should I do
सहस्र-नाम्न: हि-	(who) having a thousand names indeed
अनन्त-नाम्न: वा	or rather having endless names
इति नूनं	thus surely (thinking)
गर्ग-मुनि:-	Garga Muni
चक्रे तव नाम	performed Thy naming
नाम रहसि	in great secrecy
विभो	O Lord!
How should I do the naming of this child? He indeed has thousands of names or rather endless names. O Lord! May be that sage Garga thinking like this, performed Thy naming in great secrecy.
कृषिधातुणकाराभ्यां सत्तानन्दात्मतां किलाभिलपत् ।
जगदघकर्षित्वं वा कथयदृषि: कृष्णनाम ते व्यतनोत् ॥५॥
कृषि-धातु-	Krish, the root (verb)
ण-काराभ्याम्	and with N suffix (by putting the two together)
सत्ता-आनन्द-आत्मताम्	Existence Bliss (being Thy) real nature
किल-अभिलपत्	indeed denoting
जगत्-अघ-कर्षित्वं वा	or of (the people of) the world, the sins, drawing away
कथयत्-ऋषि:	declaring, the sage
कृष्ण-नाम ते	the name Krishna to Thee
व्यतनोत्	gave
The putting together of the root of the verb Krish and the suffix N, denoting the combining of Existence and absolute Bliss, which is Thy real nature, declaring, the sage gave Thee the name Krishna. Also signifying the drawing away of the sins of the people of the world, the name Krishna was given to Thee.
अन्यांश्च नामभेदान् व्याकुर्वन्नग्रजे च रामादीन् ।
अतिमानुषानुभावं न्यगदत्त्वामप्रकाशयन् पित्रे ॥६॥
अन्यान्-च नाम-भेदान्	and other different names
व्याकुर्वन्-	giving (like Vaasudeva)
अग्रजे च राम-आदीन्	and to Thy elder brother Raama etc (calling thus)
अतिमानुष-अनुभावं	(of a) superhuman disposition
न्यगदत्-	told (indicated)
त्वाम्-अप्रकाशयन्	Thee not revealing
पित्रे	to (Thy) father
The sage also gave Thee other different names like Vaasudeva. Then he gave the name Raama etc to Thy elder brother. Having done so, Garg Muni indicated to Thy having superhuman powers and disposition, to Thy father. Yet he did not fully reveal Thy real identity as Lord Himself.
स्निह्यति यस्तव पुत्रे मुह्यति स न मायिकै: पुन: शोकै: ।
द्रुह्यति य: स तु नश्येदित्यवदत्ते महत्त्वमृषिवर्य: ॥७॥
स्निह्यति य:-तव पुत्रे	whoever loves your son
मुह्यति स न मायिकै:	he will not be deluded by Maayaa
पुन: शोकै:	(and) again by sorrows
द्रुह्यति य:	he who goes against him
स तु नश्येत्-	he certainly will be destroyed
इति-अवदत्-	thus said
ते महत्त्वम्-	Thy glory
ऋषिवर्य:	the great sage
Who so ever loves your son will not be deluded by Maayaa and so will not be overcome by sorrows thereafter. And who so ever assails him will certainly perish.' Thus the great sage described Thy glory and greatness.
जेष्यति बहुतरदैत्यान् नेष्यति निजबन्धुलोकममलपदम् ।
श्रोष्यसि सुविमलकीर्तीरस्येति भवद्विभूतिमृषिरूचे ॥८॥
जेष्यति बहुतर-दैत्यान्	will conquer many Asuras
नेष्यति निजबन्धु-लोकम्-	will take his own people
अमल-पदम्	to the pure realm
श्रोष्यसि	will make you hear
सुविमल-कीर्ती:-अस्य-	very pure fame, his
इति भवत्-विभूतिम्-	thus Thy greatness
ऋषि:-ऊचे	the sage spoke
He will conquer many Asuras and will take his own people to the realms of purity. You will have occasions to hear of his untainted pure fame.' Thus the sage spoke of Thy greatness.
अमुनैव सर्वदुर्गं तरितास्थ कृतास्थमत्र तिष्ठध्वम् ।
हरिरेवेत्यनभिलपन्नित्यादि त्वामवर्णयत् स मुनि: ॥९॥
अमुना-एव	by him alone
सर्व-दुर्गम् तरितास्थ	all obstacles (you) will cross
कृत-आस्थम्-अत्र	placing your faith here
तिष्ठध्वम्	remain
हरि:-एव-इति-	Hari only is this
अनभिलपन्-	not saying
इत्यादि	in this manner
त्वाम्-अवर्णयत्	Thee described
स मुनि:	that sage
By his help alone you will be able to overcome all obstacles. Remain with your full faith placed in him.' Thus without saying that Thou were Hari, the sage thus described Thee.
गर्गेऽथ निर्गतेऽस्मिन् नन्दितनन्दादिनन्द्यमानस्त्वम् ।
मद्गदमुद्गतकरुणो निर्गमय श्रीमरुत्पुराधीश ॥१०॥
गर्गे-अथ	then Garg Muni
निर्गते-अस्मिन्	having left, he,
नन्दित-नन्द-आदि-	delighted Nanda and others
नन्द्यमान:-त्वम्	endeared Thou
मत्-गदम्-	my ailments
उद्गत-करुण:	(Thou) full of compassion
निर्गमय	remove
श्रीमरुत्पुराधीश	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
Then Garga Muni went away. Nanda and the others were very delighted and looked after Thee endearingly. O Lord of Guruvaayur! who are full of compassion, remove my ailments.